Hi there.
This is Lulu.
And welcome back.
Let's now look at control flow statements.
A control flow statement, as the name implies, is a statement that affects the flow of control in
your program.
And it does that by using one or more Boolean conditions.
If a particular Boolean condition is true, then it may execute a particular set of statements, and
if the condition is false, then it may execute a different set of statements.
For instance, if we consider a home loan approval program, then the statements that get executed for
one user could be different from the statements that get executed for a different user.
And it all depends upon Boolean conditions.
For example, if we consider a user who is 30 years old and who draws a salary of 50,000, then it may
satisfy one particular condition.
And based on that, a particular set of statements would get executed.
Similarly, for someone who is older and who draws a different amount of salary, then a different condition
would get satisfied and a different set of statements would get executed.
So let's get started with the if statement and control flow statements also involves other statements
like the switch statement for statement and so on, which we will look at in subsequent lectures.
For now, let's get started with if statement and you are already familiar with the basic syntax of
the if statement, but there is more to it and we are going to learn about it in this particular lecture.
So here we are in the Basics Demo class and we have a new method here called F statement in order to
learn about if statement this will be invoked from the main method.
So let's just consider the home loan approval example.
And these are the variables that we have h salary and has bad credit and they represent the state of
one particular user.
So age is 27, salary is 50,000 and let's just say that has bad credit as false and we will write a
bunch of conditions.
And if this state satisfies one of those conditions, then the loan would be approved and the true would
be written.
So loan approval is represented by this variable called approved.
Initially, it is false.
And if the condition satisfies, if the state satisfies one of the conditions, then the approved would
be set to true, which means the loan is approved.
So let's get started.
So here an F statement starts off like this.
It has parentheses and it can also have a body, it will have a body.
And these braces are optional.
But this parentheses here is mandatory.
And in between the parentheses you need to have a boolean expression.
Now, if you have something other than a Boolean expression, then you would get a compilation error.
So it's got to be a Boolean expression.
For instance, let's make it H, ages N and let's just compile here.
So I'm in the basics directory.
So it says incompatible types and cannot be converted to boolean.
So a boolean is is expected here, but we have an end which cannot be converted to boolean.
So that's what the compiler errors is.
So it has to be something like this.
Now, like I said earlier, you also need these parentheses.
So let's look at the output here.
So recompile.
So it's it gives us to compilation errors and it tells us about the left and the right parentheses.
So the parentheses is expected.
So let's put that back.
And let's write our condition here, let's say, and age less than or equal to 35 and.
Salary.
Here.
Let's make this 60,000.
And this is greater than or equal to 50,000.
Then.
We need to set a proved to true.
Okay.
Now, let's also put a print statement.
Let's put one here on one outside the F so we can clearly see the flow of control.
Here.
Let's just copy the statement and let's print it here.
And if it gets printed, it means that this condition was true and we were inside this if block.
Now.
Let's see outside.
Okay.
So this is all we have.
And a control flow statement is also a statement.
So it can also end with semicolon, but it is not required for other statements like declaration and
expression statements.
It is mandatory to have a semicolon, but for control statements it is not mandatory.
It is optional, but it is probably optional because these braces actually signify the end of this ending.
Gray signifies the end of the end of the if statement or end of any control for statement.
So that's probably one reason why a semicolon is not required.
So this here age is 27, which is greater than or equal to 25, and it's also less than or equal to
35.
And the salary is also greater than or equal to 50,000.
So the condition is true.
And we get into this, this blog gets executed, the body of F and this statement will also be executed.
So let's just compile.
So as you can see, the condition is getting printed and outside F is also getting printed.
So once the condition is true, the F block will get executed.
And after that, the control moves to the next statement after the f f statement, and that gets executed.
Now, if this happens to be false.
Then this condition would fail and the control would simply come here.
It would execute after the statement.
So anything after the if statement would get would get executed, regardless of this condition being
true or false.
So that's that.
And next thing is, if the body of the if statement has only a single statement, then we don't need
the basis.
Let's say this is the body.
We have only a single statement in this case.
We do not need the braces, the braces as optional.
But it is recommended not to have it like this.
So it is recommended to have the basis.
That's because you might have written this logic, but in future you might want to add a couple of more
statements into the body of the F.
And by mistake, you might just add it here.
And you might say, for instance, if there is a variable called interest and if it is 99% interest
for the home loan, then you might be assuming that this would be part of of the if body.
And but that's not true because still the if body includes only this particular statement.
So this would get executed regardless of whether the statement is true or false.
So even if it is false, this gets executed.
But that's not the intention.
That's not our intention.
We would want to execute this only if this condition is true.
So that's why it is always recommended to use braces.
Now.
Another thing to note is if it if the statements were like this.
In this case, the compiler would just ignore this line and would consider this as the only statement
in the body.
So just don't think that this is also a statement.
So that would be ignored by the compiler.
So let me just put the braces back.
And in one of the earlier lectures, we already looked at the block.
So if the condition is false, then else block would be executed.
Let's also put a print statement here.
So if the condition is false, then the control comes here and it would print this one else.
BLOCK And after that, outside would be printed.
Now, else.
BLOCK can also have.
It can also be like this.
It doesn't need to have the braces because it has only a single statement.
But if it has more than one statement, then braces as mandatory.
You.
So that's one thing and block is completely optional.
Now, if you have a series of conditions to test, then you can add something called as L's F blocks.
And that's what we are going to do now.
So let's say.
We have a couple of more conditions.
For users of different age group.
Okay, that's enough.
Now, let's say here, here we have h greater than or equal to 25 on h less than or equal to 35.
Now, let's put the conditions for someone who is in between 36 and 45.
So we will say h greater than 36 because 35 is already here.
So if any if somebody is 36, then they need to get into this particular block and we'll say and h less
than or equal to 45.
Let's keep increasing by ten years and salary is greater than or equal to 70,000.
And next here, let's say H is greater than 46.
Actually, let's give this 35.
I'm sorry.
And this should be 45.
So if somebody is 45 years old, then the control has to go here.
But if it is between 45, that is if it is 46 and less than 55.
OC and salary.
90,000.
Then we get into this block and let's put a similar statements here.
Just the conditions would be different now.
Let's bring this condition.
So this is just to.
Track the block that is getting executed.
Okay.
Now, let's also make this let's make it 37.
OC so it executed the L block and that's because only one condition was to so age is 37 so this was
fine and this was also fine, but salary was less than this.
So in this case, what happens is it first test this condition, and if this is false, then it would
look at this condition.
So it's going to look at each of the conditions sequentially and then it would look at this condition.
And if this is also wrong, then by default it goes into the block and that's the reason you have LS
BLOCK.
So let me make this 70,000.
And in this case we are good.
So the control goes into this block and after that it will exit the F statement.
So it will never go into the block.
It gets into the block if all of the conditions fail and there is no condition for ls.
So now we change that.
So let's go ahead and recompile and execute it.
As you can see, it got into that second half block and after that, it exited the statement and the
statement after that outside f got printed.
So only one of them is going to get executed.
So you should keep that in mind.
And the next thing is this else block is optional and else has to be if it is there, it's got to be
the last block.
So else cannot be followed by another elseif block.
So that's that.
Now let's add another F here.
So basically what we are trying to show is an F can have another F with an ID and that F can have another
F two, and this nested ness can get to any depth also.
So you can have nested F blocks and those nested blocks can have more nested F blocks.
So let's just put another condition so it gets here.
If the age is, for instance, greater than 55, so let's say age greater than 55, and instead of salary,
if somebody is over 55, let's just use the credit for other users.
We are not using the credit.
So it just changed to 57.
So it has to go into this loop and has bad credit would be false and not false is true.
So let's execute this.
There it is.
So the control came into this block and this if condition was true.
And so the statement got printed and after that there was the block.
So that got printed and finally outside have got printed.
So here this condition could have been here also as an LCF, but just wanted to show that we can also
have nested FS.
So any of these blocks can have nested F blocks if necessary.
If statements and those if statements can also have more illustrative statements and they can also have
more embedded if statements.
So it can go to any depth.
Now one other thing is, instead of having a single variable and returning it and setting that variable
in these conditions and finally returning them here, you can actually return them right from within
the blocks also.
So, for example, we can have.
Instead of this, you can directly return.
From here.
So it would be a true.
And you copy this.
In this case.
Let's return a false here.
So if this condition is not.
Should we return a false even that was happening earlier too because a proved would be false and all
of these conditions are failing.
And finally, we were returning a false.
Now let's compile and execute this.
So it says unreachable statement.
It says that one of the statements is unreachable.
So if you see here in the first block, we are returning it.
True.
After that, we have this statement and we cannot have that.
So after the return, if the control comes here, so we have this written statement and after that we
have the statement which will never get executed.
And compiler does not like that.
So.
To fix this, the written statement has to go like this.
So that's why we have written statement after the pen statements in all of the other blogs.
Now we are good.
So it's also called as an unreachable statement because the control will never reach that statement.
Now, let me change this.
Uncommon this.
Now, once again, it says that it is an unreachable statement.
It says that this particular statement, which is pending outside F is not reachable.
That's because at runtime control will definitely get into one of these blocks.
If all of these conditions fail, then it will get into this block.
And if this condition also fails, then this will for sure it will get executed.
So all of the blocks have at least a written statement, and so this will never be reached.
So that's the reason why it is giving that compilation error.
So we need to comment that out or delete it.
And one other thing is, let me.
The last and final thing is this one.
Let me comment this out.
Now, let's see.
So it says missing written statement.
It means the method is missing a written statement.
That's because we commented this out.
So the compiler is going to look at all the possible paths that can be taken at runtime.
So if this condition is true, the control would go here and runtime and there is a written statement.
And the same goes with the second and the third.
They also have written statements.
Now, if you get into the third one, and if this one fails, then control comes here and there is no
written statement.
So every particular path should have a written statement.
Otherwise you would get a compilation error, and when you see it, you can fix it.
It's not a big issue, but just wanted to let you know that a written statement would be needed in all
of the possible paths.
So that's all there is to if statement there is nothing more to it and that's it and thank you and see
you in the next lecture and happy coding.